Hello. So this is a walk-through of a solution of our exercise number 3,
the exercise on volumetric rendering.
Hopefully at this point you have had a chance to take a look at
this exercise yourself and maybe you have completed this exercise.
I just wanted to do this walk-through because I wanted to make sure that
we go through some of the important points of
this exercise and some of the libraries and methods that we have used to analyze
our 3D images and build the volume renderings out of them,
out of it, out of one image.
So let's look at some of the Python code here and let's look at the imports,
the libraries that we will be relying upon.
We have the numpy library here,
which is the library for manipulating
multi-dimensional arrays in Python and doing linear algebra operations on them.
We have this library called nibabel,
which is the library for manipulating NIfTI files.
In the next lesson, we will go into some detail of what
are the file formats used by in 3D medical imaging.
We will talk about DICOM and NIfTI.
For now don't worry about that too much, we have this library,
nibabel, this is the library that you use to load NIfTI files.
We have matplotlib, matplotlib is our usual suspects
for displaying plots in Jupyter notebooks,
and we will be using that to display our medical images,
and we have the scipy library,
which we will use to perform some algebraic operations on our array,
as you will see below.
So let's run the cell,
we've loaded our library.
In the next line here, what's happening,
we're using the nibabel library to load a volume.
The volume is stored as a zipped NIfTI file,
so this is a standard way of storing NIfTI files,
and it's one file that holds all of the three-dimensional medical image.
Let's run this cell, load the volume.
Then the next cell we are using the method called get_fdata.
This is the method that takes all the voxels from
the 3D medical volume and converts that into a numpy array.
So at this point in this image_np,
we just have a numpy array,
which should be a three-dimensional array,
and we will confirm that by running
this member by calling this member variable called shape.
If we run the cell now,
we can see that our array is of shape 360 by 360 by 330,
which is what we would expect,
so it has quite a few voxels in there.
The first dimension is the x-axis and if we cut across this axis,
we will get slices in the sagittal plane.
So remember how we just talked about
the three cardinal anatomical planes: sagittal, coronal and axial.
I just happened to know because I looked at this volume,
that's the first dimension here is
the x-axis cutting through it will give us the sagittal plane.
The second dimension is the y-axis and
cutting through that it will give us the coronal plane.
The third dimension is the z-axis,
and cutting through z-axis will give us the axial plane.
You can guess that this is the axial plane because
the third dimension has less size than the first two.
Typically, 3D medical images will have equal dimensions in the primary acquisition plane,
and we've talked how for CT scans axial plane is the primary acquisition plane typically.
So I can take a really good guess that if I cut through the Z dimension here,
I will get my axial slices.
So at this point, let's visualize a cut across the first axis, the x-axis.
Let's make a call for a matplotlib library and we will pass this variable to it.
So these are the two-dimensional array extracted from level 100 of the first dimension.
So as we've established, the first dimension,
the x-axis is our sagittal plane,
sagittal plane separates the left from the right.
Actually what we're looking at here is a cut through the image of a human head,
right somewhere towards the left side of it,
and we will see it much clearer as we get into the next stages of the exercise,
because what we want to do now,
we want to use the information from all the slices
to visualize a volumetric rendering of this volume.
So let's go into the first part of the exercise,
which is the orthographic projection.
What we will do here,
here I've asked you to just add up all the slices across one axis, the x-axis.
Let us do that.
So we have our holder array,
array that's our x by z dimensions in size,
this should be a 360 by 330 array.
What we will do here,
the solution to that task is really simple,
we just iterate all of the slices across
the x dimension and cross all of the sagittal slices,
and we just add them all up.
So one we will call the matplotlib image show methods on a volume like that,
it will know how to scale them properly to visualize them using the greyscale color map.
Note that I'm also using this scipy method
nd.rotate here to rotate the volume by 90 degrees.
I just happen to know that the way it's stored,
it's sideways so I will do this rotation so that the volume shows up properly.
After I run this code,
we do our sum up and what we see here is a volumetric rendering,
the orthographic projection of all the slices across the coronal plane,
and even without much knowledge of the anatomy,
you can guess that what we are looking here is a human head.
You might also notice that this thing here looks very much like an X-ray.
Actually, if we look at an X-ray of a human head on a site called radiopaedia,
which has a nice collection of various medical images.
If we compare that to what we have just computed,
we will see it is very similar and actually it looks almost exactly the same.
This is something to be expected because if you remember the lesson
on the physical principles of the CT scanners,
then you will remember that CT scanners operate by casting X-rays through the anatomy and
measuring the attenuation of the X-rays by different parts of the anatomy.
X-ray machines, the radiographs,
they do the same thing,
but as the measure of the attenuation through the entire volume
of anatomical structure under study as opposed to a single slice a CT machine is doing.
So what we are doing here in this exercise,
we are adding up all the slices that CT machine has acquired,
and this amounts to the same operation essentially as an X-ray scan is doing.
So if you add up all the slices acquired by CT scanner,
you will get a simple radiograph.
That's what we have here,
it's a radiograph of a human skull or orthographic projection of a CT image.
In the next portion, I am asking you to implement
an algorithm called maximum intensity projection.
So if in the previous exercise,
we took all of the voxels across one slice and we added them all up,
now we will do something different.
We will try to propagate the values with highest intensity by going through this process,
by going through the process of adding all the slices across one axis.
For a change, we will do this across the y-axis.
To recall why the y-axis is the axis
that's cutting through this axis will yield us coronal planes,
and coronal planes, they separate front from the back.
So if we do our thing right,
we we'll have a frontal view of the human head here that's represented by our 3D volume.
So let's try doing that.
We have our holder array.
The holder array is of size 360 by 330 again.
We will write a loop which is very similar,
so we're looping across our y-dimension,
but now work using this np.maximum function.
What this function does basically,
it computes the maximum values between the holder array and the image at a given slice,
the two-dimensional image at a given slice.
Let us perform this operation and let's visualize our image.
Again, I will do the rotation here to bring it into proper orientation,
and if we do that we will get this beautiful picture of a human skull.
So this picture is quite different from the picture we have just seen,
and here we see these highlights,
we see the bright white areas.
So this is exactly why MIP projections,
maximum intensity projections are useful to clinicians.
Because these projections, they bring out the tissues that has the highest radio density.
In this case, it is clear that our image has
some synthetic material in it because these things do not look natural.
So we have some pins in hear that the patient has implanted into their mandible.
We have something that looks like a tooth implant and we have some
probably this is some metal hardware that's sitting there closer to the face.
So this is clearly an image of someone who has undergone some facial surgery.
This is why maximum intensity projections allows us to clearly see
the implants here and how they relate to the overall anatomy.
So I hope you enjoyed this exercise.
There is much more to volumetric rendering.
You have been introduced to a couple of methods for doing that.
If you're interested later on in this lesson,
I will post some links to some amazing methods
for volumetric rendering that people have used.
For now, we're getting to the end of this lesson
and I hope you will enjoy the next lesson on the actual medical imaging formats.